# Thyroid-disease-dataset
Comparative study on the thyroid disease diagnosis using machine learning classification models.

One of the most common and ignored illness is a disease called thyroid disease, where women make up majority of the patients. It is a medical state that impacts the functionality of the thyroid gland as well as every essential organ in the body because it is responsible for the regulation of our body’s metabolism (Rouhani and Mansouri,2009). Hence, it is important to recognition of the disease in of utmost importance. The thyroid is a butterfly shaped gland situated underneath the Adam’s apple wrapped around the trachea. The thyroid uses iodine to transport the major hormones that combines with the amino acid tyrosine to make the thyroid hormone (Razia et al.,2018).

Thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) are two crucial hormones produced by the organ, where their key purpose is to regulate how the cells, tissues, glands and organs use oxygen and energy. As written by Shamon, 2019, the thyroid functions are overseen by the pituitary gland (attached to the base of the brain). This gland detects when the thyroid hormone levels are quite low in the bloodstream and transfers a hormone called Thyroid stimulating Hormone (TSH) that encourages the thyroid to produce more T4. If the thyroid performs irregularly it is related to the production of too little of the thyroid hormone(hypothyroidism) or too much of the hormone(hyperthyroidism) (Polat, et al., 2007), Goitre, where the thyroid gland swells due to a development of a lump in the front of the neck (nhs.uk,2019) because of iodine excess and deficiency, and nodular thyroid disease and T3 thyroid toxicosis that is caused when a lot of T3 is produced in presence of T4 concentration(Sterling et al., 1970).

It is important to recognize what are the symptoms that causes this disease and how it differentiates from a healthy person so that the disease can be prevented. By learning and training different machine learning algorithms we can identify how severe the patient’s illness is by the illness he or she has.

The data was taken from the Thyroid disease dataset from UCI machine repository (Dua et al., 2019). Nine classification models have been analysed and compared (Decision Trees, C5.0, RFC Forest, Support Vector Machine, Gradient Boosting, Neural networks, Random Forests, K nearest neighbors and Naïve Bayes used as a base model). The models have been trained and tested on a validation set and then the best three models are tested on a test set that the model has never seen. The best models from the validation set will be chosen based on the Kappa of each model. Before beginning to train the models, the data will be pre-processed or cleaned where imputation, dummification, balancing of the data will occur.

This assignment is a comparative study on the thyroid disease diagnosis using machine learning classification models.
